# Optimising Docker Images

Docker images can get really big. Many are over 1G in size. How do they get so big? Do they really need to be this big? Can we make them smaller without sacrificing functionality? Over the past few weeks we have spend a considerable amount of time a lot of time building different docker images. As we began experimenting with image creation one of the things we discovered was that our custom images were ballooning in size pretty quickly (it wasn't uncommon to end up with images that weighed-in at 200MB or more). Now, it's not too big a deal to have a couple gigs worth of images sitting on your local system, but it becomes a bit of pain as soon as you start pushing/pulling these images across the network on a regular basis. I think it was worthwhile to really dig into the docker image creation process so that we could understand how it works and whether there was anything we could do differently to minimize the size of our images.

## Image Layers

Before we can talk about how to trim down the size of your images, we need to discuss layers. The concept of image layers involves all sorts of low-level technical details about things like root filesystems, copy-on-write and union mounts -- luckily those topics have been covered pretty well [here](https://docs.docker.com/engine/userguide/storagedriver/imagesandcontainers/) so no need rehash those details here. For our purposes, the important thing to understand is that each instruction in your `Dockerfile` results in a new image layer being created. Let's look at an example Dockerfile to see this in action:
```
RUN mkdir /tmp/foo
RUN fallocate -l 1G /tmp/foo/bar

```

This is a pretty useless image, but will help illustrate the point about image layers. We're using the alpine:linux image as our base, creating the /tmp/foo directory and then allocating a 1 GB file named bar in that directory. Let's build this image: $ docker build -t sample, sending build context to Docker daemon 2.56 kB:

`Step 0 : FROM alpine:linux ---> e8d37d9e3476`

`Step 1 : RUN mkdir /tmp/foo ---> Running in 3d5d8b288cc2 ---> 9876aa270471 Removing intermediate container 3d5d8b288cc2`

`Step 2 : RUN fallocate -l 1G /tmp/foo/bar ---> Running in 6c797329ee43 ---> 3ebe08b36733 Removing intermediate container 6c797329ee43 Successfully built 3ebe08b36733`

If you read the output of the docker build command you can see exactly what Docker is doing to construct our sample image:
```
    Using the value specified in our FROM instruction, Docker will docker run a new container from the alpine:wheezy image (the container's ID is 3d5d8b288cc2).
    Within that running container Docker executes the mkdir /tmp/foo instruction.
    The container is stopped, committed (resulting in a new image with ID 9876aa270471) and then removed.
    Docker spins-up another container, this time from the image that was saved in the previous step (this container's ID is 6c797329ee43).
    Within that running container Docker executes the fallocate -l 1G /tmp/foo/bar instruction.
    The container is stopped, committed (resulting in a new image with ID 3ebe08b36733) and then removed.
```

We can see the end result by looking at the output of the `docker images --tree` command (unfortunately, the --tree flag is deprecated and will likely be removed in a future release):
```
$ docker images --tree Warning: '--tree' is deprecated, it will be removed soon. See usage. └─511136ea3c5a Virtual Size: 0 B Tags: scratch:latest └─59e359cb35ef Virtual Size: 85.18 MB └─e8d37d9e3476 Virtual Size: 85.18 MB Tags: alpine:wheezy └─9876aa270471 Virtual Size: 85.18 MB └─3ebe08b36733 Virtual Size: 1.159 GB Tags: sample:latest
```

In the output you can see the image that's tagged as alpine:linux followed by the two layers we described above (one for each instruction in our Dockerfile). We often talk about "images" and "layers" as if they are different things -- in reality each layer is itself an image. An image's layers are nothing more than a collection of other images. In the same way that we could say: `docker run -it sample:latest /bin/bash`, we could just as easily execute one of the untagged layers: `docker run -it 9876aa270471 /bin/bash`. Both are images that can be turned into running containers -- the only difference is that the former has a tag associated with it ("sample:latest") while the later does not. In fact, the ability to create a container from any image layer can be really helpful when trying to debug problems with your Dockerfile.

## Image Sizes

Knowing that an image is really a collection of other images, it should come as no surprise that the size of an image is the sum of the sizes of its constituent images. Let's look at the output of the docker history command:

```
$ docker history sample IMAGE CREATED CREATED BY SIZE 3ebe08b36733 3 minutes ago /bin/sh -c fallocate -l 1G /tmp/foo/bar 1.074 GB 9876aa270471 3 minutes ago /bin/sh -c mkdir /tmp/foo 0 B e8d37d9e3476 4 days ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) CMD [/bin/bash] 0 B 59e359cb35ef 4 days ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) ADD file:1e2ba3d9379f 85.18 MB 511136ea3c5a 13 months ago 0 B
```

This shows all of the sample image's layers along with the instruction that was used to generate that layer and the resulting size (note that the ordering of layers in the docker history output is reversed from that of the docker images --tree output). There are only two instructions that contribute anything of substance to our image: the ADD instruction (which comes from the alpine:wheezy image) and our fallocate command. Together, these two layers total 1.16 GB which is roughly the size of our image. Let's actually save our image to a tar file and see what the resulting size is:
```
$ docker save sample > sample.tar $ ls -lh sample.tar -rw-r--r-- 1 core core 1.1G Jul 26 02:35 sample.tar
```

When an image is saved to a tar file in this way it also includes a bunch of metadata about each of the layers so the total size will be slightly bigger than the sum of the various layers. Let's add one more instruction to our Dockerfile:
```
FROM alpine:wheezy RUN mkdir /tmp/foo RUN fallocate -l 1G /tmp/foo/bar RUN rm /tmp/foo/bar
```

Our new instruction will immediately delete the big file that was generated with the fallocate command. If we docker build our updated Dockerfile and look at the history again we'll see the following:
```
$ docker history sample IMAGE CREATED CREATED BY SIZE 9d9bdb929b00 8 seconds ago /bin/sh -c rm /tmp/foo/bar 0 B 3ebe08b36733 24 minutes ago /bin/sh -c fallocate -l 1G /tmp/foo/bar 1.074 GB 9876aa270471 24 minutes ago /bin/sh -c mkdir /tmp/foo 0 B e8d37d9e3476 4 days ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) CMD [/bin/bash] 0 B 59e359cb35ef 4 days ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) ADD file:1e2ba3d9379f 85.18 MB 511136ea3c5a 13 months ago 0 B
```

Note that our addition of the rm command has added a new (0 byte) layer to the image but everything else remains exactly the same. If we save our new image we should see that it's almost exactly the same size as the previous one (it'll differ only in the little bit of space that is needed to store the metadata about the new layer we added):

```
$ docker save sample > sample.tar $ ls -lh sample.tar -rw-r--r-- 1 core core 1.1G Jul 26 02:55 sample.tar
```
If we were to docker run this image and look in the container's /tmp/foo directory we would find it empty (after all, the file was removed). However, since our Dockerfile generated an image layer that contains a 1 GB file it becomes a permanent part of this image.

`Note`: Each additional instruction in your Dockerfile will only ever increase the overall size of your image.

Clearly, this example is a little silly, but the idea that images are the sum of their layers becomes important when looking for ways to reduce the size of your images. In the following sections, I'll discuss some strategies for doing just that.

##  Reuse your Base

This is a pretty obvious tip, but the base image you choose can have a significant impact on your overall image size. Here are the sizes for some of the more common base images:
```
$ docker images REPOSITORY TAG IMAGE ID CREATED VIRTUAL SIZE scratch latest 511136ea3c5a 13 months ago 0 B busybox latest a9eb17255234 7 weeks ago 2.433 MB alpine latest e8d37d9e3476 4 days ago 85.18 MB ubuntu latest ba5877dc9bec 4 days ago 192.7 MB centos latest 1a7dc42f78ba 2 weeks ago 236.4 MB fedora latest 88b42ffd1f7c 10 days ago 373.7 MB
```

Let's say our team, we had been using the `ubuntu image` as the base for most of our work -- only because most of the team was already familiar with Ubuntu. However, after playing with the alpine image we realized that it actually did everything we needed and saved us 100+ MB in image size. The list of viable base images are going to vary depending on the needs of the image you're building, but it's certainly worth examining -- if you're using Ubuntu when BusyBox would actually meet your needs you're consuming a lot of extra space unnecessarily. One thing I would love to see is the image size displayed on the Docker registry. Right now, the only way to see the size of an image is to first pull it to your local system.

## Chain Commands

One of the nice things about the layered approach to creating images is that layers can be re-used across different images. In the example below you can see that we have three different images that all use alpine:wheezy as their base:
```
$ docker images --tree Warning: '--tree' is deprecated, it will be removed soon. See usage. └─511136ea3c5a Virtual Size: 0 B Tags: scratch:latest └─e8d37d9e3476 Virtual Size: 85.18 MB Tags: alpine:wheezy ├─22a0de5ea279 Virtual Size: 85.18 MB │ └─057ac524d834 Virtual Size: 85.18 MB │ └─bd30825f7522 Virtual Size: 106.2 MB Tags: creeper:latest ├─d689af903018 Virtual Size: 85.18 MB │ └─bcf6f6a90302 Virtual Size: 85.18 MB │ └─ffab3863d257 Virtual Size: 95.67 MB Tags: enderman:latest └─9876aa270471 Virtual Size: 85.18 MB └─3ebe08b36733 Virtual Size: 1.159 GB └─9d9bdb929b00 Virtual Size: 1.159 GB Tags: sample:latest
```

Each of the three images adds something on top of the alpine:linux image, but there aren't three copies of Alpine. Instead each image simply maintains a reference to the single instance of the Alpine layer (one of the reasons I like the `docker images --tree` view is that it makes the relationship between the different layers very clear). This means that once you've pulled the alpine:linux image you shouldn't have to pull those layers again and the bits for the image only exist once on your local file system. So you can save a significant amount space and network traffic by re-using a common base across your different images.

## Flatten your Image

In our sample image above we created a file and then immediately deleted it. That was a contrived example but similar scenarios often do occur when building images. Let's look at a more realistic example:
```
FROM alpine:wheezy WORKDIR /tmp RUN wget -nv RUN tar -xvf someutility-v1.0.0.tar.gz RUN mv /tmp/someutility-v1.0.0/someutil /usr/bin/someutil RUN rm -rf /tmp/someutility-v1.0.0 RUN rm /tmp/someutility-v1.0.0.tar.gz
```

Here we're pulling down a tar file, extracting it, moving some files around and then cleaning up. As we saw before, each one of these instructions results in a separate layer. Even though we're removing the tar file and the extracted directory those things are still part of the image.
```
$ docker history some utility IMAGE CREATED CREATED BY SIZE 33f4a994ae27 16 seconds ago /bin/sh -c rm /tmp/someutility-v1.0.0.tar.gz 0 B fec7b5e24c1f 17 seconds ago /bin/sh -c rm -rf /tmp/someutility-v1.0.0 0 B 0851974d72e7 18 seconds ago /bin/sh -c mv /tmp/someutility-v1.0.0/someuti 12.21 MB 5b6b996f0364 19 seconds ago /bin/sh -c tar -xvf someutility-v1.0.0.tar.gz 99.91 MB 0eebad5d831c 20 seconds ago /bin/sh -c wget -nv http://centurylinklabs.co 55.34 MB d6798fc80576 8 minutes ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) WORKDIR /tmp 0 B e8d37d9e3476 5 days ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) CMD [/bin/bash] 0 B 59e359cb35ef 5 days ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) ADD file:1e2ba3d9379f7685a1 85.18 MB 511136ea3c5a 13 months ago
```

The wget command resulted in a layer that was 55 MB and then extracting the tar created a 99 MB layer. We don't actually need either of these things in the final image so we've got 150+ MB of wasted space here. We can work around this issue by refactoring the Dockerfile a little bit:
```
FROM alpine:wheezy WORKDIR /tmp RUN wget -nv http://centurylinklabs.com/someutility-v1.0.0.tar.gz && \ tar -xvf someutility-v1.0.0.tar.gz && \ mv /tmp/someutility-v1.0.0/someutil /usr/bin/someutil && \ rm -rf /tmp/someutility-v1.0.0 && \ rm /tmp/someutility-v1.0.0.tar.gz
```

Instead of executing each command as a separate RUN instruction we've chained them all together in a single line using the && operator. While this makes the Dockerfile a little harder to read it allows us to clean-up the tar file and extracted directory before the image layer is committed. Here's what the resulting image looks like:
```
$ docker history some utility IMAGE CREATED CREATED BY SIZE 8216b5f01ea8 7 seconds ago /bin/sh -c wget -nv http://centurylinklabs.co 12.21 MB d6798fc80576 17 minutes ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) WORKDIR /tmp 0 B e8d37d9e3476 5 days ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) CMD [/bin/bash] 0 B 59e359cb35ef 5 days ago /bin/sh -c #(nop) ADD file:1e2ba3d9379f7685a1 85.18 MB 511136ea3c5a 13 months ago 0 B
```

Note that we end-up with exactly the same result (at least as far as the running container is concerned) but we've trimmed some unnecessary layers and 150 MB out of the final image. I wouldn't recommend that you go and string together every command in your Dockerfile but if you find a pattern like the one above where you're creating and later removing files then chaining a few instructions together can help keep your image size down.

## Next steps

Managing the size of Docker images is a challenge. It's easy to make them smaller without sacrificing functionality.
