# Docker Compose

Lets face it ... our applications have dependencies, lots of them. We have databases, caches, queues, and whatever framework is flavour of the week in Javascript land. On-boarding new developers is a nightmare! Well, until Docker Compose came along :happy:

Lets assume we're working on a PHP or Python application, pretty standard setup: MySQL database, Redis or Mongo ... because PHP can't scale without Varnish :smile:

In the past we would have provided a `README` that was hundreds of lines long. In the not-as-far-back-past some of us adopted `Vagrant` and we started providing hundreds, or thousands of provisional code.

## What is Docker Compose?

Docker Compose is an application that allows us to provide a `YAML` configuration file that describes our applications environment. Using this `YAML` file, Compose will launch all the Docker Containers you need. What's more? It'll configure any shared volumes, networks and environment variables your applications need to work efficiently.


## Installing Docker Compose

```shell
curl -L https://github.com/docker/compose/releases/download/1.9.0-rc2/docker-compose-`uname -s`-`uname -m` > /usr/local/bin/docker-compose
chmod +x /usr/local/bin/docker-compose
```

## Example

This is an example `docker-compose.yml`. Put this in a directory and run `docker-compose up` and watch the magic happen.

```yaml
version: '2'

services:
  application:
    image: php:7-apache
  redis:
    image: redis:3.2-alpine
  mysql:
    image: mysql:5.7
```

### Configuring Services with Environment Variables

#### AKA "Being 12-Factor"

It's probably rather rare that we get away with specifying a service as simply an image. For instance, in order for our application to speak to mysql, we need to inject some credentials. Not only that, we've not even configured mysql with that knowledge yet.

One of the most important steps when setting up services with Docker Compose is getting environment variables into the system. This can be done by supplying the `environment` list to your service.

```yaml
version: '2'
services:
  mysql:
    image: mysql:5.7
    environment:
      MYSQL_USERNAME: username
      MYSQL_PASSWORD: password
```

### Tip

You can use environment variables already defined on your host with either of the following syntaxes:

```yaml
version: '2'
services:
  mysql:
    image: mysql:5.7
    environment:
      # This will use "MYSQL_USERNAME" as defined on the host
      MYSQL_USERNAME:
      # This will use "MYSQL_PASSWORD" as defined on the host
      MYSQL_PASSWORD: ${MYSQL_PASSWORD}
```

### Tip

You can test your configuration, and it's interpolated values:

### YAML Warning

Due to the `YAML` spec being absolutely crazy, there's a few ways of specifying our environment variables for Docker Compose. You'll come across all of them in the wild, but I would suggest picking one you like and sticking to that for projects within your control.

#### YAML List

```yaml
services:
  mysql:
    image: mysql:5.7
    environment:
      - MYSQL_DATABASE=my_database
```

#### YAML Dictionary

```yaml
services:
  mysql:
    image: mysql:5.7
    environment:
      MYSQL_DATABASE: my_database
```

#### YAML Inline Lists & Dictionaries ... sigh

```yaml
version: '2'
services:
  mysql:
    image: mysql:5.7
    environment: [ "MYSQL_DATABASE=my_database" ]
    environment: { MYSQL_DATABASE: my_database }
```

## Sample Python Application Setup
### Create a directory for the project
```
 $ mkdir composetest
 $ cd composetest
```

### create a file called app.py in your project directory.
```
from flask import Flask
from redis import Redis

app = Flask(__name__)
redis = Redis(host='redis',port=6379)

@app.route('/')
def hello():
    redis.incr('hits')
    return 'Hello World! I have being seen %s times.' % redis.get('hits')

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host="0.0.0.0", debug=True)
```

### Create another file called requirements.txt in your project directory and add the following:
```
 flask
 redis
 ```
##  Step 2: Create a Docker image
n your project directory create a file named Dockerfile and add the following:
```
 FROM python:2.7
 ADD . /code
 WORKDIR /code
 RUN pip install -r requirements.txt
 CMD python app.py
```
This tells Docker to:
Build an image starting with the Python 2.7 image.
Add the current directory . into the path /code in the image.
Set the working directory to /code.
Install the Python dependencies.
Set the default command for the container to python app.py 

### Build the image.
```
 $ docker build -t web .
```
This command builds an image named web from the contents of the current directory. The command automatically locates the Dockerfile, app.py, and requirements.txt files.

## Step 3: Define services
Create a file called docker-compose.yml in your project directory and add the following:
```
version: '2'

services:
  web:
    build: .
    ports:
     - "5000:5000"
    volumes:
     - .:/code
    depends_on:
     - redis
  redis:
    image: redis
```
This Compose file defines two services, web and redis. The web service:

Builds from the Dockerfile in the current directory.
Forwards the exposed port 5000 on the container to port 5000 on the host machine.
Mounts the project directory on the host to /code inside the container allowing you to modify the code without having to rebuild the image.
Links the web service to the Redis service. Pull the [redis](https://registry.hub.docker.com/_/redis/) image from Docker Hub

## Step 4: Build and run your app with Compose
From your project directory, start up your application.
```
$ docker-compose up
 Pulling image redis...
 Building web...
 Starting composetest_redis_1...
 Starting composetest_web_1...
 redis_1 | [8] 02 Jan 18:43:35.576 # Server started, Redis version 2.8.3
 web_1   |  * Running on http://0.0.0.0:5000/
 web_1   |  * Restarting with stat
 ```
 Compose pulls a Redis image, builds an image for your code, and start the services you defined.
Enter http://0.0.0.0:5000/ in a browser to see the application running.
If you’re using Docker on Linux natively, then the web app should now be listening on port 5000 on your Docker daemon host. If http://0.0.0.0:5000 doesn’t resolve, you can also try http://localhost:5000.
If you’re using Docker Machine on a Mac, use docker-machine ip MACHINE_VM to get the IP address of your Docker host. Then, open http://MACHINE_VM_IP:5000 in a browser.
You should see a message in your browser saying:
Hello World! I have been seen 1 times.
Refresh the page.
The number should increment.
## Step 5: Experiment with some other commands
If you want to run your services in the background, you can pass the -d flag (for “detached” mode) to 'docker-compose up' and use 'docker-compose ps' to see what is currently running:
```
$ docker-compose up -d
Starting composetest_redis_1...
Starting composetest_web_1...
$ docker-compose ps
Name                 Command            State       Ports
-------------------------------------------------------------------
composetest_redis_1   /usr/local/bin/run         Up
composetest_web_1     /bin/sh -c python app.py   Up      5000->5000/tcp
```
The docker-compose run command allows you to run one-off commands for your services. For example, to see what environment variables are available to the web service:
```
$ docker-compose run web env
```
See docker-compose --help to see other available commands. You can also install command completion for the bash and zsh shell, which will also show you available commands.

If you started Compose with docker-compose up -d, you’ll probably want to stop your services once you’ve finished with them:
```
$ docker-compose stop
```
At this point, you have seen the basics of how Compose works.

## Any Questions?
Further experiments with Docker compose could be found [here](https://docs.docker.com/compose/django/)
