# Creating Containers, Part I

## Running Our First Container

```shell
$ docker run alpine:3.3 echo Hello, World!
```

In this example, we've instructed Docker to run a command on our host, `docker run`. What is special about this, is that the command, `echo Hello, world!` is executed in a virtualised environment. This isn't the virtualisation that you are probably used to, which we'll assume is using virtual-machines on a hyper-visor. Container virtualisation happens natively on the Linux kernel :shocked:

We'll keep this simple for now! Lets imagine that our containers are a Linux process running inside of a `chroot`. Like all good `chroot` environments, we need to provide a directory / file-system for the jail. In this instance, we've selected a popular base operating system for containers: Alpine Linux.

### Alpine Linux

Alpine Linux is a lightweight distribution, an extension to busybox. What makes it worth using over busybox? It has a pretty sweet package manager, `apk`.

More information can be found [here](https://alpinelinux.org/).

## Running Our Second Container

```shell
$ docker run --rm alpine:3.3 date
```

OK. This seems pretty simple again. It's the same as our first container, only we've replaced the command, `echo Hello, World!` with `date` ... and we added an additional flag, `-rm`. Just like in Linux-land, `--rm` means to remove / delete; but what are we deleting? :confused:

Let's run the following in a shell:

```shell
$ docker ps
CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND             CREATED             STATUS              PORTS               NAMES
```

We see some headers and nothing more. That's because we have no running containers. Lets try something else.

```shell
$ docker ps -a
CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND                CREATED             STATUS                     PORTS               NAMES
d6c561594239        alpine:3.3          "echo Hello, World!"   10 seconds ago      Exited (0) 9 seconds ago                       modest_visvesvaraya
```

So now we're seeing something, thanks to the flag `-a`, which shows all containers, not just running. We can see our first container, `echo Hello, world!`, but not our second container, `date`.

This is because of the `--rm` flag that we passed to our second `docker run` command. If you're running one-off commands and don't need to inspect or investigate the container post-humous, use this flag.

## Bonus Points

Depending on your timezone, you may have noticed that the `date` command issued in container printed the wrong time. Why do you think this is?

```bash
# Local Machine
Mon Sep 26 09:01:30 BST 2016

# Container
Mon Sep 26 09:01:30 UTC 2016
```

