# Building Images, Part I

## What is a Docker Image?

A Docker Image is a file-system. Sometimes complex, perhaps a whole distribution, and sometimes super small, sometimes just a single binary. Consider a Docker Image the same as the file-system / directory you would use in your `chroot` jail.

Docker provides a system for building these isolated file-systems for us: `docker build`. In order to utilise this system, we must first start with a `Dockerfile`

## Dockerfile

There are not that many keywords that we must understand in-order to produce a `Dockerfile`. The most important of them all is `FROM`, quickly followed by `RUN`. It's extremely rare that you won't need `RUN`, though entirely possible. We'll come back to that in later examples.

### All Images Must Have a Base

Every `Dockerfile` must have a starting point, specified by the `FROM` line. As we hae explored Alpine a little already, we shall continue down this path and use that as our base. This means we are starting with an Alpine Linux file-system and we can now modify it with whatever we need to run our application within the container.

```dockerfile
FROM alpine:3.3
RUN echo -e '#!/usr/bin/env sh\necho Hello, world!' > /bin/runme.sh
RUN chmod +x /bin/runme.sh
```

In this Dockerfile, we're writing a script to the `/bin` directory and ensuring that it has the execute permission.

We can then build this Dockerfile into an image with `docker build -t my_new_image .`

```shell
$ docker build -t my_new_image .
Sending build context to Docker daemon   106 kB
Step 1 : FROM alpine:3.3
 ---> 9ee0d93aaa3f
Step 2 : RUN echo -e '#!/usr/bin/env sh\necho Hello, world!' > /bin/runme.sh
 ---> Running in 3232f35e3a50
 ---> 5d58d942554e
Removing intermediate container 3232f35e3a50
Step 3 : RUN chmod +x /bin/runme.sh
 ---> Running in ab926201437f
 ---> 14847a52247c
Removing intermediate container
```

You can then run this image as a container:

```shell
$ docker run --rm my_new_image /bin/runme.sh
```

Awesome, right? :happy:

### Dockerfile Keywords

- COPY
- ADD
- ENV
- VOLUME
- CMD
- ENTRYPOINT

#### COPY

`COPY` allows us to get files, or directories, from our build-context into our image.

*Example*
```dockerfile
COPY . /app
COPY ./bin/my-app /bin/my-app
```

#### ADD
`ADD` is the same as `COPY`, but with a little magic added. `ADD` can also be used
to pull remote files and add them to your image. It also must be noted that `ADD` will
do unexpected things with archive files, such as zips, tar, etc. It will EXTRACT them.
Be careful :happy:

